---
layout: post
title:  "Law"
date:   2014-07-16 23:39:35
categories: project
---


* This will become a table of contents (this text will be scraped).
{:toc}



## Legislation

Law codified or made by the government

For example:

* The Professional Engineers Act of Ontario
* Human Rights Code
* Employment Standards Act


## Common Law

Cases (Judge-made law)

Theory of Precedent: apply legal principles established by similar or analogous situations to the current situation.

Changes slowly over time.


## Structure of the Courts


             Canada                 England
        
     Supreme Court of Canada     House of Lords
               /\                      /\
               ||                      ||
         Court of Appeal         Court of Appeal
               /\                      /\
               ||                      ||
    Superior Court of Justice      Trial Judge



## The Burden of Proof

In criminal law, accusations must be proven **beyond a reasonable doubt.**

In civil law (as in common law), determinations are made based on the **balance of probabilities.**


## Limitation Periods

Limitation period means that any law suit must be commenced within a certain period of time. If a suit is started after this time has elapsed, it will automatically fail.

The 3rd edition PPE Law book is wrong, as the law changed January 1, 2004.

Now all claims (tort, contract, and professional negligence) must be commenced within 2 years of the "discovery" of the problem, and within 15 years of when the service was provided.

Principle of Discoverability: where there is a breach of the duty of care, the limitation period does not begin until the plaintiff discovers or ought reasonably to have discovered the damage.

There is an ultimate limitation of 15 years after the service or product was provided.


## Consideration

The courts do not concern themselves with the value or amount of consideration.  It is up to the parties to negotiate the price for a product or service.

Without consideration, there is only a promise to do something, not an enforceable contract.

## Seals

If a document is "sealed", this satisfies the requirement of consideration for an enforceable contract.

There are two types of seals:

* Personal Seal: red adhesive wafer.
* Mechanical Seal: imprinted with a mechanical device.

Tenders in construction contracts are often sealed (as an irrevocable offer must have consideration).

## Equitable Estoppel

Consider the following situation:

2 parties enter a contract. Under the terms of the contract, 1 party (the contractor) will perform the work, and the other party (the owner) will pay for those services.

At some point, the parties change the terms of the contract, or no longer comply with the strict terms of the contract.  Both parties act as if the terms of the contract have changed.  In fact, one party (for example, the contractor) relies on the actions of the other party (the owner) -- indicating that the terms of the contract have changed.

Then, the client party reverts back to the terms of the original contract and refuses to pay.

The court says that even though there was no consideration for the "new contract" (created by the changes to the old contract), it would be unfair to allow the party to get out of their obligation to pay.

In this case the client party is **estopped** (prevented) from relying on the strict terms of the contract.


### A Lack of Consideration

Without consideration, there is only a promise.  This not a legally binding contract.

The questions are:

1. Can one party avoid the obligations of a new contract (promise) because no consideration was exchanged?
2. Can one party enforce the strict contractual terms of the original contract?


### Case 1: Conwest Exploration

Vendor owned mining claims.  Purchaser had to take certain steps by a  specific date in order to exercise option for mining rights.  The vendor determined that the purchaser could not satisfy the conditions. The vendor implied that the time would be extended so that the other party could satisfy the conditions.  However, the promise to extend was not accompanied by consideration. Then, the vendor said that the original date must apply.

The Supreme Court of Canada decided that it was "inequitable" or unfair for the vendor to enforce the original agreement.  The purchaser relied on the vendor's time extension and, therefore, should abide by that new term of the contract.  Therefore, the vendor was estopped form reverting back to the original terms of the contract.

Key trigger for equitable estoppel: the purchaser *relied* on the new terms *implied by the other party*.


### Case 2: Owen Sound Public Library

Both parties agreed that the due date for payment to the contractor would be extended.  The owner wanted the contractor to affix a seal to the architect's certificate. Contractor undertook to obtain seal.  Payment date passed.  The contractor later tried to terminate the contract because the owner had not paid within the time required.  The Court said that the contractor's conduct led the owner to believe that the due date for payment would be extended.  Therefore, the contractor was estopped from enforcing the original terms of the contract.

Key: The owner *relied* on the new terms *agreed to by the other party*.


### Case 3: John Burrows

The plaintiff in this case was trying to enforce a promissory note.  Payments were made late and the penalties were not enforced.  In this case, if a payment was made late, then the entire principle was required to be paid.

For the principle of estoppel to apply, it would be neccesary to demonstrate that the "first" party intended that the legal relations created by the original contract would be altered as a result of the negotiations.  The fact that one party did not immediately enforce the terms of the original contract is not sufficient to change the terms of the contract.

It is important to distinguish this from the Conwest case.  In that case, the vendor had implied consent to the new arrangement, whereas in the John Burrows case, the plaintiff's silence did not constitute agreement.


## Legal Capacity

### Minors

Contracts with minors (persons who have not reached the age of majority) are enforceable only:

* by the minor
* Or, if it is a contract for necessary items such as clothing, food, lodging, or transportation
* Or, if the contract is ratified by the minor when s/he reaches age of majority (18 in Ontario)


### Capacity of Corporations

To be enforceable, the contract must be within the powers of the corporation.

For day-to-day dealings, it is possible to rely on the representatives of the corporation, so long as the acts are within the actual, usual, or apparent scope of the official's authority.


## Legality of Purpose

A Contract cannot be enforced if its purpose is unlawful or contrary to a statute.  For example: commiting a crime, avoiding payment of a debt, contracting with a non-licensed tradesperson, etc.

A Contract cannot be enforced if it is against public policy (contrary to common law). For example: a contract that contains restrictive covenants such as a non-compete clause in an employment contract.

To be enforceable, terms like a non-compete clause must restrict the party they concern no more than is necessary. Restrictions must be "reasonable" in terms of both time and geography.

If it is reasonable, then the contract will be enforceable.


## Form of a Contract

Contracts may be oral, written, or both.  

However, for a contract to be enforceable under the Statute of Frauds, it must be in writing.  This statute applies to:

* Sale of land
* Contracts to be performed beyond 1 year
* Guarantees of indebtedness (not contracts of indemnification)

Even if a contract is unenforceable because of the Statute of Frauds, it will not be void -- for example, if a buyer abandons an oral agreement for the purchase of land, a deposit made for the land under that oral contract would not be return.

## Factors affecting the formation of a contract

### Innocent misrepresentation

A false assertion made by a person who does not appreciate that the statement is false.

The deceived party must repudiate (treat as terminated) the contract within a reasonable amount of time, and will be entitled to damages for their costs sustained as a result of entering into the contract.

### Fraudulent misrepresentation

A statement made: (1) that is knowingly false; (2) without belief in its truth; or (3) recklessly, without regard for whether it is true or false.

The deceived party is entitled to rescind the contract (treat the contract as if it never happened) and claim damages for reasonable costs that they incurred as a result of entering into the contract.  They may also sue for damages for deceit or damages for negligent misrepresentation.

The right to sue for damages for negligent misrepresentation was established in the Hedley Byrne case.

### Economic Duress

When a party is forced to renegotiate the terms of a contact to their detriment, the contract is not valid and will not be enforced.

By "forced" it is meant that at the time of making the contract there are no other options available, and if the contract is not accepted the party will face severe economic losses.

**Gotaverken Case** -- A contract was established to retrofit a boiler in a pulp mill for $26 million.  The Owner had paid almost $24 million of this when problems developed ("gas-outs" affecting contractor's personnel)  that led to work interruptions, which threatened the contractor with substantial losses.  The owner compensated the contractor for the cost of the gas-outs, but the contractor threatened to reduce shifts substantially unless the contract was changed from fixed-price to time-and-materials.  The owner was under duress, as they would suffer extreme economic losses if the contractor reduced shifts and failed to complete the work.  The court held that the owner was forced into the new contract under economic duress, and thus the new contract was not enforceable.

### Mistake

Courts rarely provide relief to contracting parties if a unilateral mistake is made.  Parties are responsible for their own mistakes.  If, for example a party offers a contract that states an incorrect price, the contract can be enforced and the offeror forced to comply with the terms of the contract.

**Belle River Case** -- a contract was $70,000 lower than intended because of an error transferring a figure on a summary sheet. The contract was made under seal and irrevocable for 60 days.  The defendant contractor was trying to withdraw the offer, but was not allowed to do so by the plaintiff owner.  The Trial Judge said that a contractor may not have to comply with a contract under such circumstances.  He noted that in such a situation, an owner was likely to receive poor work or end up with a lawsuit.  The Court of Appeal said that an offeree cannot accept a contract where he knows that it has been made by mistake and the mistake affects the fundamental terms of the contract.  Because of the mistake, the contract was not the one that the offeror had intended to make, and the offeree was aware of that fact.

**Ron Engineering** -- a deposit of $150K was paid with a tender.  The tender contained a mistake: $750K was omitted, out of a total of $2.7 million.  An hour after the tenders open, the contractor informed the Water Commission (owner) of the mistake.  The trial judge ruled in favour of the Commission, saying that the contract was bound by the tender.  The Ontario Court of Appeal ruled in favour of the contractor, saying that the mistake was material and important, and was immediately drawn to the attention of the Commission.  An appeal was made to the Supreme Court of Canada to decide if Ron Engineering was entitled to their $150K deposit.  The SCC ruled in favour of the Water Commission, because the tender had included an independent contract which stated that if the tender was withdrawn, then the deposit of $150K would be forfeit.  Since the ruling relied on this independent portion of the tender and not on the mistake in the contract, the SCC decision here did not impact the earlier Belle River ruling.

Traditionally, if a party made a mistake, they were responsible for it ("too bad for them"). The Belle River ruling made the intentions of the parties matter.  A contract was only enforceable if it was the contract that both of the parties *intended* to enter into.

The Ron Engineering ruling established that if there were 2 related contracts (in this case, the work contract and the tender contract) and there was a mistake in one of them, the party making the mistake is still bound by the other contract (the tendering contract) but could not be forced to comply with the contract where the mistake was made (the work contract).

The typical structure in a tendering process, based on the SCC decision in Ron Engineering, is that there will be two contracts:

* Contract A, governing the tendering process.  The owner's request constitutes offering Contract A, and the contractor submitting an irrevocable bid constitutes their acceptance of it.
* Contract B, the actual contract for construction or services

The two-contract system may limit an owner's ability to negotiate with other contractors due to the terms of Contract A.  It is therefore potentially advantageous for both parties to make Contract A as flexible as possible, providing the right to delete terms, make changes, overlook mistakes, and negotiate.  Overly aggressive or unfair terms/rights in Contract A might affect its enforceability.

**Ben Bruinsma** -- Contract A was formed by a number of contracts.  The Owner deleted an item in the tendering process, making a different bidder the new lowest bid.  The tender package (Contract A) did not say that items could be deleted, so the Owner was found to be in breach of Contract A, and the previous (prior to the deletion) lowest bidder was awarded the Contract B.

**Chinook** -- *Note that this is a British Colombia case.* The ruling found that the owner must adhere to an implied duty to accept lowest bidder unless the tender documents contained terms expressly stating that the bids would be evaluated on other criteria.  The language "the lowest tender or any tender will not necessarily be accepted" was found to be unacceptable.

**Megatech** -- *A comparable case in Ontario.* The lowest bid did not follow the tender guidelines.  The Owner was allowed to accept another bidder because the tender package said "can award the contract to the lowest bidder or any bidder".  This language is acceptable in Ontario, and therefore there was no breach of Contract.

**Kencor** -- *Another similar case, from Saskatchewan.* Language cannot be too broad or vague, for example "refuse or accept any tender, waive defects, technicalities, or accept any tenders that are considered to be in the best interest of the Province."  The terms must state the criteria on which the decision will be based.


## Contract Interpretation

Courts can interprt the meaning of a contract if there is a dispute between the parties.  The court tries to determine the most reasonable interpretation through an examination of witnesses, consideration of intent, and study of definitions.

The "liberal" approach takes into account the intent of the parties.

The "strict" approach focusses on the precise words of the agreement, so long as the contract is not unconscionable.  See the Hunter Engineering Case.

The principle of *Contra Proferenter* is generally applied: where a contract is ambiguous, it will be interpreted against the party who drafted the provision (or equivalently, in favour of the other party).


### Parol Evidence Rule

This is the principle that external oral evidence cannot be used to change the interpretation of a written contract or vary its terms.  For example, if a condition is agreed on verbally but not contained in the contract, it will not be considered part of the contract.

There are some exceptions to this. If the validity of a contract is conditional on some provision being satisfied, then oral evidence may be consulted to establish whether or not that provision was satisfied.

**Pym** -- Parties were to have shared ownership of a new machine.  The machine would have to be approved by 2 engineers before it would be purchased.  Only one of the engineers approved, and thus no contract was formed because of approval provision which the contract was conditional upon.


### Implied Terms

Where clearly reasonable, courts may imply terms into the contract.

**Moorcock** -- A boat moored at a dock was damaged when tide went out. The court decided that it was an implied term of the contract that the boat would be safe at low tide while at the dock.

The *Sale of Goods Act* provides a number of other terms that are generally implied:

* Materials and workmanship will be of proper standard and quality.
* Work will be carried out in a proper and workmanlike manner.
* When completed and installed, the object will be fit for the purpose intended.
* Work will be completed in a reasonable time and without undue delay.
* Workmanship must comply with the Building Code and/or other relevant legislation.


## Discharge of Contracts

Contracts can be considered 'discharged' for a number of reasons:

*Performance*: both parties have performed their obligations (excepting warranties)

*Agreement to Discharge*: parties can mutually agree to cancel or terminate a contract.

*Discharge Persuant to Express Terms*: discharge will occur automatically after certain events, such as bankruptcy, failure to complete work properly, or failure to comply with terms of the contract.

Additionally, it can happen due to *Frustration*, *Breach*, or *Repudiation*.


### Discharge by Frustration

A contract may be frustrated where the obligations of the parties have been radically changed by circumstances not foreseen or contemplated by the parties.

**Metropolitan Water Board** -- Had a contract to build a reservoir over the course of 6 years.  The occurrence of the war dramatically altered circumstances, requiring construction to stop.  The contract was discharged by frustration.

Often, a *Force Majeur* provision will be included in a contract.  This generally provides guidance as to how the contract will change in the event of war, riot, insurrection, flood, labour dispute, or other events beyond the control of either party.

**Davis Contractors** -- it was not considered frustration of contract when a shortage of labour delayed completion of a project. It simply placed more onerous terms on the parties.


### Breach of Contract

Breach of contract occurs if a party fails to perform their obligations under the contract.  Whenever there is a breach of contract, the other party may recover damages.  However, the contract is not always discharged at this point.  The contract is only discharged when:

* There is no reason for the innocent party to proceed with their performance of the contract,
* There is an intention to no longer be bound by the contract, or
* A term that is of major importance to the contract is broken.

It is only considered a breach of contract when a condition has been breach.  A condition is defined as an obligation that is essential or vital to the contract.

A breach of a warranty is not considered a breach of contract, as a warranty does not meet the standard of "an obligation essential to the contract".


### Repudiation of Contract

When one party expressly tells (by word or conduct) the other party that they have no intention to perform their obligations under the contract, it is considered repudiation.  This can be due to an inability to perform, or other reasons.  The innocent party can either ignore the breach, or assume that the contract has been discharged by repudiation and claim damages.  They are expected to communicate this to the repudiating party.


## Remedies

The non-defaulting party is entitled to monetary damages for breach of contract.

**Hadley v Baxendale** -- The innocent party is entitled to damages that are fair and reasonable.  The damages should be those that flow naturally from the breach of contract, or are commensurate with the probable or reasonably foreseeable result of the breach of contract.


### Types of Damages

*Direct Damages* are the amount of the loss suffered as a direct result of the breach of contract.  For example, the extra cost incurred by the party beyond the original contract price.

*Indirect Damages* encompass all other losses suffered due to the breach of contract, such as loss of profits, fines, etc.


### Duty to Mitigate

Parties must take reasonable steps to mitigate or reduce the amount of damages suffered.  If a plaintiff did not take reasonable actions to mitigate damage, the court will take this into account when fixing the size of the damages awarded.


### Penalty Clauses

These can be included in contracts, and establish a prescribed amount to be paid in damages if a certain event occurs. This amount is referred to as *Liquidated Damages*. Parties must make a genuine attempt when entering in to the contract to estimate the likely damages the event would cause.  If the estimate is not reasonable, the court is unlikely to uphold the penalty clause.  


### Fundamental Breach

In many cases, companies try to limit their liability (typically to the full value of the contract) should anything go wrong.  This is done through *Exclusion Clauses*.  However, traditionally in the event of a fundamental breach, exclusion clauses were ignored.

**Harbutt's Plasticine** -- *A case from England.* A plastic pipe designed to carry plasticine cracked and the entire factory burnt down.  The design of the pipe was totally unsuitable for the purpose it was used for. The contractor was held to be in fundamental breach of the contract and could not rely on the exclusion clause which would have limited damages to a nominal amount.

The Harbutt's precedent was traditionally followed in Canadian courts, but they have been moving away from this principle.  The precedent set by Harbutt's was overturned by the Photo Production Ltd. case.

**Photo Production Ltd.** -- *Another English case.* The contract was for security services.  One of the security guards accidentally started a fire which destroyed the factory.  The contract contained a broad exemption clause, and in an appeal to the House of Lords this clause was upheld.  The security contractor was permitted to rely on the exemption clause to limit their liability.

The takeaway from this is that a contract should contain all essential terms in an express form.  Parties are free to negotiate all of the terms of a contract.

**Murray v. Sperry Rand** -- *Ontario Court of Appeal.* A farmer purchased a harvester which did not perform as promised, having disastrous results on his land.  The decision was made based on the Harbutt's Plasticine case, with the court stating that an exclusion clause cannot be used as a cover for misconduct or indifference.

**Beaufort Realties** -- A subcontractor working on a project was not paid.  The Ontario Court of Appeals determined that this was a fundamental breach of contract, and additionally it would not be fair and equitable for the subcontractor to not be paid.  The Supreme Court of Canada upheld this, but stated that where there is a fundamental breach, it is necessary to examine the true construction and meaning of the contract, rather than relying on Harbutt's Plasticine.  The Supreme Court determined that the waiver did not apply even though it was clear.

**Syncrude v. Hunter Engineering** -- *Supreme Court of Canada.* Hunter supplied Syncrude with gear boxes, and these subsequently failed.  The gear boxes were rebuilt, and Syncrude sued for the cost.  The warranty clause of the contract had expressly denied all warranties, including the statutory warranties under the Sales of Goods Act.  The Court unanimously ruled that Hunter was not liable.  They stated that exemption clauses are effective if the language is clear and leaves no doubt as to the meaning.  Parties are free to contract as they wish, and in this case there was no evidence of unconscionability or unequal bargaining power.

Therefore, clear and direct exemption clauses, where the parties are of equal power, will be upheld.


## Tort Law

The purpose of Tort Law is to compensate victims for the wrong they suffered.


## Negligence

Based on the principle that people are responsible for their negligent behaviour.  However, this does not mean that they are liable or responsible for every error in judgement.

It does not mean that parties are expected to have an extraordinary degree of care and skill, nor does it require them to guarantee success or achieve perfect results.

Not all errors are negligent.  For example, if an engineer is required to used old technology at the time the services are performed, errors might occur despite the fact that the engineer made every possible effort at the time.

The *Professional Engineers Act of Ontario* defines negligence as:

> An act or omission in the carrying out of work of a practitioner that constitutes a failure to maintain the standards that a reasonable and prudent practitioner would maintain in the circumstances.

### History of Tort Law

Traditionally, a person was only liable for the injuries suffered by another person if there was a contract between them. Then:

**Donoghue v. Stevenson** -- Two people drank a ginger beer at a diner.  One of them purchased the ginger beer for the other, and gave it to them freely.  There was a snail in the ginger beer given to the second person, and they became sick.  This was due to a fault on the part of the manufacturer (not the retail store).  The injured person did not have a contract with the retail store, or the manufacturer.  However, the courts said that the manufacturer was responsible for taking reasonable steps to ensure the ginger beer was free from any defect likely to cause injury.

**Hedley Byrne** -- Confirmed the principles of Donoghue v. Stevenson.  A company asked its bankers to look into the credit rating of a supplier.  The bankers reported that the financial position was favourable, but stated that they were "not responsible" for their advice.  The plaintiff continued to do business with the supplier, and incurred losses as a result.  The court determined that where one person relied on the specialized skills of another and that other knew of the reliance, they were duty-bound to take reasonable care in exercising their skill.  However, the bank was still found not responsible as a result of the language disclaiming their advice.

Note that there is an expectation for professional not to give negligent advice, and they cannot disclaim responsibility.

Sometimes, parties are not responsible to all third parties for damages - they can disclaim responsibilities to third parties via express terms.

Other cases have also found that parties can be held accountable for negligence, even if they feel that they are not being relied upon.  What matters is what their conduct objectively makes the other party believe or think.  For example the Canama Contracting case, which involved a manure pit on a pig farm, for which they relied on the advice of a government engineer.

### Principles of Tort Law

The key criteria that must be met for a case to be considered under tort law are:

1. The defendant owed the plaintiff a duty of care.
2. The defendant breached the duty of care by their conduct.
3. The defendant's conduct cause the plaintiff's damages/injuries.


### Breach of Duty of Care

An engineer must conduct their services in accordance with the conduct of a prudent and diligent engineer in the circumstances.

For specialists, a higher degree of skill is expected.  The reasonable expectation is that they should exercise the degree of skill of an average specialist in their field.


### Causation

Did the engineer's conduct cause the injuries suffered by the plaintiff?

    Conduct  -->  Causation  -->  Injury/damages

In most cases, it is clear that there was causation.


### Damages

*Direct Damages*: those damages suffered by the plaintiff as a result of the negligence or breach of contract.

*Indirect* or *Consequential Damages*: damages that arise in consequence to the breach of contract, such as fines, lost profits, etc.

Whether or not the damages were *foreseeable* as a result of the engineer's conduct plays a role in the determining the damages awarded.

Where the damages were foreseeable, the plaintiff may recover damages for economic loss where no threat of injury or physical harm to property exists.  See the **Winnepeg Condominiums** case.


### Economic Loss

Economic loss caused by negligence may sometimes be recovered, as in the **Hedley Byrne** case.  In product liability matters, economic losses caused by the use of a defective product are sometimes recoverable.  For example, in the **Rivtow** case, the defendant was responsible for loss of profits while the "crane" was being repaired.

However, they are not always recoverable.  For example, when damage to an electrical cable interrupts work and employees are sent home, a defendant cannot be held liable for the employees salaries as they would have been paid in any event.



### Other Tort Concepts

*Vicarious Liability*: an employer is vicariously liable for the negliegent acts of its employees for acts within the scope of authority and course of employment.

*Concurrent Tortfeasors*: two or more people who are all considered responsible for the damages caused.


### Product Liability

When damage results from the use of a product, Tort Law (negligence) can apply. The **Donoghue v. Stevenson** case expanded this to include the relationship between manufacturers and consumers.

Contract law is also applicable, due to the implied terms of a sales contract.  Specifically, these include *Merchantability* and *Fitness* for a particular purpose.


### Duty to Warn

A manufacturer must warn the consumer of any dangerous potential of the product by appropriate labelling.

**George Ho Lern** -- A hunter purchased a shot-shell reloading machine.  He was told that the machine would produce normal shell shots if the instructions were followed.  However, the Plaintiff did not follow the verbal or written instructions provided.  The defendant was found not responsible, as they had provided adequate notice.

It is also important that labels be specific:

**Lambert** -- *Supreme Court of Canada.* This decision found that manufacturers must be held to a high standard of care to specifically warn of all dangers. The label was found to not have been specific enough.


## Miscellaneous topics to research elsewhere

* Business Organizations
* The agreement between client & engineer
* Concurrent liability in tort and contract
* The duty of honesty
* Construction contracts
* Arbitration and ADR
* Lien legislation
* Regulatory aspects and ethics
* Industrial property
* Laws relating to employment

### Corporations

Directors are elected by the shareholders to direct the corporation.  They are held to a high standard of care and expected to:

* Act honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of the corporation.
* Exercise with care, diligence and skill that a reasonably prudent person would exercise in comparable circumstances.
* Disclose any conflicts of interest.


### Construction Contracts

Engineers may prepare plans, assist in tendering, and administer construction contracts, however they generally are not a party to the construction contract.

Engineers are expected to act judicially if empowered to make decisions that are final and binding.  They should act independently of the owner and in good faith, not as the agent of the owner. See the **Brennan** case -- they should act as though not being paid by the owner.


### Inspection Services

An engineer must exercise a reasonable duty of care and skill and discharge responsibilities competently.  They must inspect all significant aspects of construction personally, or by a competent representative.


### Lien Legislation

Provincial legislation creates lien rights and requires amounts to be held back from contractors for a specific period of time.  Parties are entitled to a lien if they supply services or materials to an "improvement".  This can include engineering services.

When the owner receives notice of a lien, they are then required to retain both the holdback amount (typically 10%) and the amount of the lien claim (which cannot exceed the amount of services and materials provided).

If they do not, the owner may be liable to pay the lien claim and may be forced to sell the land.


### Construction Lien Act

Holdbacks will be equal to 10% of the price of the services or materials as they are supplied.

There can be 2 holdbacks: the first for *Substantial Completion* of the work or services, and the second for finishing work.

The holdback will be released when all liens that may be cliamed have expired, been satisfied, discharged, or paid into court.

*Substantial Completion* can be defined in several ways:

* When all work is completed.
* When a substantial part is completed and it is being used for its intended purpose.
* When the work completed exceeds a specified percentage of the contract price.


### The Ontario Human Rights Code

Every person has a right to equal treatment with respect to employment without discrimination because of race, ancestry, place of origin, colour, ethnic origin, citizenship, creed, sex, sexual orientation, age, martial status, family status, record of offences or handicap.







## Format of the Law Exam

4 questions

* \#1 will be a Definition question
* \#2, #3, #4 will be Case questions

Short answer questions are possible, but rare.  They could be regarding "legality of purpose", "unilateral mistakes in the tendering process", or "disclaimer in tort"

Case questions are not looking for the correct answer, number, or a yes/no decision.  Answers should demonstrate your knowledge of the legal principles.


### Law case questions

Tort questions are generally of the form: "What potential liabilities arise in tort law? In your answer explain what principles of tort law are relevant and how each applies to the case."

Contract questions are generally about Equitable Estoppel, Fundamental Breach, Unilateral Mistake, or Legality of Purpose.

*Equitable Estoppel*

Situation: Two parties renegotiate the terms of a contract, and both parties acted as if there was a "new" contract, but no consideration is given, and there was an element of unfairness

Question: Was XYZ company entitled to terminate the contract? Explain the relevant legal principle, how it arises and how it should be applied in this situation.

*Fundamental Breach*

Situation: An exclusion clause limiting liability was included in a contract.  The product or service provided under the contract was grossly inadequate.

Question: Explain and discuss what claim XYZ company can make against ABC company in the circumstances.  In answering, explain the approach taken by Canadian courts with respect to the contracts that limit liability and include a brief summary of the development of relevant case precedents.

*Unilateral Mistake*

Situation: A mistake was made in the tendering process, and one party wants the deposit returned.

*Legality of Purpose*

These often regard non-compete clauses.


at p58, law long answer questions template.





















